ideas for a first draft (#1)
formal-methods-mpi/julia-workshop: SIPS2023.md

# Your name

<!--AP: I think Maximilian should be clearly the lead and submit:-->

Maximilian Ernst

# Your email address

ernst@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

# Your Mastodon handle (optional)

# Your Mastodon handle (optional)

# Proposed session title

<!--AP: I have a preference for something catchy, some ideas:-->

> Speed dating Julia: The new programming language on the block

Reviewer: cool

Bye bye R, ciao Python, adieu Matlab, welcome Julia: A fresh approach to scientific computing

# Session type

- [X] Workshop
- [ ] Hackathon
- [ ] Unconference

# Are you planning to have your session in person in Padua, Italy or remotely in the virtual format?

- [X] in-person
- [ ] remote

# Abstract

*Please provide a brief (\~150 words) abstract/description of your proposed session*

<!--AP: Thats short. Make use of `wordcountaddin::text_stats_chr`.-->
<!--AP: Current wordcount is 140.-->

> The progress of science is increasingly coupled to the advance of software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The progress of science is tightly coupled to the availability of research software.
```

> Machine learning, neuroimaging, adaptive testing, ecological momentary assessment are examples of methodologies that continue to benefit psychological sciences enormously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Machine learning, neuroimaging, adaptive testing, and ecological momentary assessment are examples of methodologies that continue to benefit psychological sciences enormously.
```

However, their benefits are limited by psychologists' ability to employ software in their research context successfully.
Julia is a new programming language for numerical computing that uses exciting new technology for the efficient development and execution of scientific software, i.e., the strain on both researchers and computers is minimized.
Julia's design principles ensure that software is highly extensible and adaptable, making the language more than a gradual improvement over existing languages.
Learning Julia introduces researchers to ideas and principles of modern scientific software development.

> And yes, scripts are software.

Reviewer: are they ... ?

> The workshop provides hands-on experience in Julia but aims to teach principles that carry over to R/Python.

Reviewer: I don't know... I think we focus more on the things that make julia unique

# Hackathon Endproduct

*If your session is a hackathon, what is your end product? Hacks should have a clear “deliverable”—a project or product you are making progress on. If you session is intended as a discussion or brainstorming session, consider submitting it as an unconference instead.*

> Although this is a workshop, the goal is for the participants to create and "take home" a software product (script/package) that highlights Julia's unique abilities but is applicable for their day to day work.

Reviewer: I think that might be too ambitious...

> Although this is a workshop, the goal is for the participants to create and "take home" a software product (script/package) that highlights Julia's unique abilities but is applicable for their day to day work.

Reviewer: I think that might be too ambitious...

# Diversity and Inclusion

*How will the session leaders’ content foster diversity & inclusion (e.g., who will present, who will it serve) and how will that improve the science? Note that this response will be used in advertising your session.*

We believe that the successful application of software within research requires a more inclusive way of producing software.
Scientists often have innovative ideas, but only a tiny fraction of them actively engage in shaping the software they need for their research.

> Julia fosters the inclusion of "average" researchers by fundamentally rethinking the relationship between users and developers of software.

Reviewer: "average" is not so nice i guess

We will present the workshop collaboratively, representing several levels of seniority.
Maximilian S. Ernst, a student, will take the lead, while Moritz Ketzer, predoctoral researcher, and Aaron Peikert, principal investigator, will help facilitate the workshop.

# Pre-requisite

*Please note any pre-requisite knowledge/expertise you will expect from attendees or indicate that no prior experience is needed. This information is very useful for attendees as they decide what to attend, ie., is a session most appropriate for someone who already has experience with a topic or is brand new to it?*

The workshop requires that you kow how to program in some scripting language (R, Python, Ruby, Matlab).
A sure indication that you have the experience to benefit from the workshop is that you have written and used a custom function as part of a project you have been working on in the past two years.
Still not sure?

> If you can write a function in any language that prints the numbers from 1 to 100, but for multiples of three prints "Foo" instead of the number, and for the multiples of five prints "Bar" in under 30min, you are ready.

Reviewer: nice :)

# Theme

*Please classify your session as the theme it fits best in:*

  - [ ] Pedagogy/curriculum/mentoring: content related to educating students
  - [X] Skills: content providing training in particular skills or techniques
  - [ ] Incentives/culture: content related to the incentive structure of science, culture, and norms of science
  - [ ] Logistics/tools: content related to creation or refinement of new tools, databases, and methods
  - [ ] Other

# How would you like to conduct this session?

  - [ ] Fully synchronously

>   - [X] Synchronously + ramp-up (e.g., attendees have something to watch ahead of time, hack materials open early, plus a synchronous session)

Reviewer: I am not shure what their definition of sychronously is...

  - [ ] Fully asynchronously

# If accepted, how long would your session be?

>   - [X] 3h

Reviewer: in theory, we could propose more than 3 hours?

Maximilian S. Ernst, student resarcher
Moritz Ketzer, predoctoral researcher
Aaron Peikert, principal investigator

<!--I'll ask for feedback on how to phrase this from people who care deeply about inclusion-->

We welcome suggestions for other co-leaders to broaden the perspective to people without background in methods/statistics and/or with less privilege.

# Time

*What times of day (in Padua time, GMT+1) are you generally able to present/attend if you were to present remotely? (The time zone converter https://www.worldtimebuddy.com/ may be useful). Having more flexible presenting hours will facilitate more global engagement. We will use these time preferences for our online programming and in case in-person presenters have to switch to a remote format.*

Anytime.

# Zoom

*For virtual sessions: Do you or one of your co-leads have a Zoom pro account that enables you to host meetings longer than 40 minutes? (Note that if you do not, we will be happy to set up the space for you).*

>   - [X] Yes, I am able to host my own space

Reviewer: do you have zoom pro?
